---
layout: post
title:      "Learning How to Learn"
date:       2018-04-18 20:58:10 +0000
permalink:  learning_how_to_learn
---


I’ve been thinking a lot lately about learning how to learn. That’s the name of a great [Coursera course](https://eventing.coursera.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.cXmk5E9SdP7iOU5sItq_ulzr7XfrfX2i1H99RhD7jyA) by the way (link). When I first started the boot camp I took copious notes, but I soon realized that approach was ridiculously time consuming and not helping me retain the material as much as I expected. Now I am more targeted about my notetaking, which  forces me to think about which are the key points before I start writing them down. Although I’ve always thought of myself as someone who loves learning, I realized that learning about a historical event, or even how a biological process works, is completely different from coding. When I first started the boot camp I sometimes had the experience of reading a lesson, thinking I understood it, and then opening up a lab and having no idea how to start. That experience reminded me of when I taught genetics and I would tell my students that they wouldn’t know if they understood the material until they tried to do the problem sets. Understanding how to use the concepts is fundamental to both genetics and coding. Sometimes when I hit that brick wall it feels as though my 60-year old brain is a box that has been nailed shut and I have to start prying it open. But I have the sense that the more times I do that, the looser the nails are becoming, which is very exciting. I have also learned (again) how important sleep is to learning, as I recently adopted a puppy who needs to be taken outside every few hours, even at night.  In contrast to mine, my puppy’s brain is like a sponge. So much so that I have to be careful he’s not learning too many things that I do not want him to know. But I like to think that we’re being students together and that both of our brains are forming lots of new and useful synaptic connections. 


